.TH NOISSHD 1 "2026-06-19" "noissh 0.4.9" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
noisshd \- resilient remote shell over the Noise Protocol Framework (server)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B noisshd
.RB [ \-\-listen
.IR ADDR ]
.RB [ \-\-key
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-authorized\-keys
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-command
.IR "CMD ..." ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.br
.B noisshd \-\-one\-shot \-\-authorize
.I B64PUB
.RB [ \-\-bind
.IR ADDR ]
.RB [ \-\-command
.IR "CMD ..." ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B noisshd
is the noissh server daemon. It accepts Noise\-encrypted UDP sessions, demultiplexes
them by a cryptographic session id (independent of source IP, which is what
enables roaming), authenticates the client's static key against
.IR authorized_keys ,
allocates a PTY, and runs the user's login shell.
.SH MODES
.SS Standalone
A persistent daemon using a persistent static key and
.I authorized_keys
file. This is the default mode.
.SS One\-shot
Used by the
.B noissh --ssh
bootstrap. Generates an ephemeral key, trusts only the single client key given
with
.BR \-\-authorize ,
binds an ephemeral UDP port, prints a line of the form
.RS
.B NOISSH CONNECT <port> <base64 server pubkey>
.RE
on standard output, detaches from the controlling terminal, and serves one
session.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-listen " ADDR"
Bind address for standalone mode (default 0.0.0.0:51820).
.TP
.BI \-\-key " PATH"
Static key file (default <config>/noisshd_key); generated on first use.
.TP
.BI \-\-authorized\-keys " PATH"
Authorized client keys (default <config>/authorized_keys).
.TP
.BI \-\-command " CMD ..."
Run this command instead of the login shell (the remaining arguments form the
command). Useful for restricted or scripted sessions.
.TP
.B \-\-one\-shot
Ephemeral key; serve a single session, then exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-authorize " B64PUB"
In one\-shot mode, the single base64 client public key to trust.
.TP
.BI \-\-bind " ADDR"
Bind address in one\-shot mode (default 0.0.0.0:0, an ephemeral port).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Log session lifecycle (each session established and ended, with the current
active session count) and fatal socket errors.
.SH SECURITY
An unauthorized client key is rejected at handshake completion, before any
session or PTY/login work occurs. On Linux, when built with the
.B pam
feature and run as root, the privilege\-separated backend performs
.BR setgid / initgroups / setuid
and PAM account/session setup. The portable backend runs the shell as the
current user and needs no root.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I <config>/noisshd_key
Server static keypair.
.TP
.I <config>/authorized_keys
Allowed client public keys, one
.I noissh-x25519 <base64>
per line.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR noissh (1),
.BR sshd (8),
.BR pam (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Gerardo Di Giacomo.
