.TH NOISSH 1 "2026-06-19" "noissh 0.5.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
noissh \- resilient remote shell over the Noise Protocol Framework (client)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B noissh
.RB [ \-\-ssh ]
.RB [ \-\-direct ]
.RB [ \-\-port
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-\-server\-cmd
.IR CMD ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-install ]
.RB [ \-\-server\-port
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-L
.IR SPEC ]
.RB [ \-R
.IR SPEC ]
.RB [ \-D
.IR SPEC ]
.RB [ \-\-put
.IR SPEC ]
.RB [ \-\-get
.IR SPEC ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-\-copy\-id ]
.RB [ \-\-forget\-host
.IR HOST ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RI [ user @] host
.RI [ command "" ...]
.RB [ \-\-
.IR "ssh args" ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B noissh
connects to a
.BR noisshd (1)
server and runs an interactive login shell that survives packet loss, high
latency, IP changes, NAT rebinding, and laptop sleep/resume without
reconnecting. All cryptography uses the Noise Protocol Framework
.RB ( Noise_XX_25519_ChaChaPoly_BLAKE2s ).
The interactive shell rides unreliable latest\-wins datagrams and a client\-side
predictive\-echo engine, giving an instant feel even on poor links.
.PP
A bare
.B noissh
.I host
first attempts a direct Noise/UDP session to a standing
.BR noisshd (1)
on the host (UDP port 51820 by default, or
.BR \-\-port ),
pinning the server's key on first use. If nothing answers within a few seconds,
it automatically falls back to the SSH bootstrap (see
.BR \-\-ssh ),
launching
.B noisshd
over your existing SSH access and auto\-installing it if missing. A host\-key
mismatch on the direct attempt is a hard error and does
.I not
fall back to SSH. Use
.B \-\-direct
to require a direct connection, or
.B \-\-ssh
to force the bootstrap and skip the direct probe.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-direct
Require a direct connection to a standing
.BR noisshd (1)
and never fall back to the SSH bootstrap. This forces the first attempt that a
bare
.B noissh
.I host
makes by default.
.TP
.B \-\-ssh
Force the SSH bootstrap, skipping the direct probe. Run
.B ssh
.I host noisshd --one-shot
to obtain the UDP port and the server's ephemeral public key, then connect over
Noise/UDP. (Without this flag the bootstrap still runs automatically when the
direct attempt finds no daemon;
.B \-\-ssh
just skips the few\-second probe.) No pre\-shared
.I authorized_keys
entry is required. If
.B noisshd
is not yet installed on the remote, the first connect installs it automatically:
the published installer is run over the same SSH session, detecting the remote
OS/arch, downloading the matching prebuilt release binary, verifying its SHA\-256
checksum, and installing it into
.IR ~/.local/bin ,
after which the handshake is retried. This applies only to the default server
command and is skipped when
.B \-\-server\-cmd
is set. The install step requires
.BR curl (1)
or
.BR wget (1)
on the remote. If the remote
.B noisshd
is already installed but reports an older version than this client, noissh asks
(default no) whether to upgrade it before continuing; declining keeps the
existing remote version. The prompt is skipped when stdin is not a terminal and
when
.B \-\-no\-install
is given.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-install
Disable the automatic remote install performed by
.BR \-\-ssh .
A missing
.B noisshd
then fails the connection instead of being installed.
.TP
.BI \-\-port " N"
UDP port for a direct connection to a standalone server (default 51820).
.TP
.BI \-\-server\-cmd " CMD"
Remote server command used with
.BR \-\-ssh
(default
.IR noisshd ).
.TP
.BI \-\-server\-port " N"
Pin the bootstrapped server to UDP port
.I N
instead of an ephemeral one, so the port can be opened in a firewall/NAT. Useful
when a host permits SSH but blocks arbitrary inbound UDP: open
.I N
and pass the same
.I N
here.
.TP
.BI \-L " LPORT:HOST:PORT"
Local port forward: connections to
.IR 127.0.0.1:LPORT
on this machine are tunnelled, over the resilient session, to
.IR HOST:PORT
reachable from the server. May be repeated. Implies forward\-only (no shell).
.TP
.BI \-R " RPORT:HOST:PORT"
Remote port forward: the server listens on
.IR 127.0.0.1:RPORT
and tunnels accepted connections back to this client for delivery to
.IR HOST:PORT .
May be repeated. Implies forward\-only (no shell).
.TP
.BI \-D " [BIND:]PORT"
Dynamic port forward: run a local SOCKS proxy on
.I PORT
(bound to loopback unless
.I BIND
is given) whose connections are tunnelled, over the resilient session, to the
host and port each client requests, resolved via the server. The proxy speaks
SOCKS5 (no authentication) and SOCKS4/4a, CONNECT only. May be repeated. Implies
forward\-only (no shell).
.TP
.I command ...
Any words after
.RI [ user @] host
are run as a single command on the server non\-interactively (ssh\-style) instead
of opening a shell, then exit. The words are joined and interpreted by the remote
shell, so quoting, globs, pipes, and redirections take effect there. The
command's standard output and standard error are streamed separately to yours,
your standard input is forwarded until EOF, and noissh exits with the command's
exit status. Output is byte\-for\-byte (no PTY/terminal processing), so it is safe
to redirect or pipe. The remote command's own flags are not parsed by
.BR noissh .
Mutually exclusive with an interactive shell. Refused by a
standalone daemon configured with a
.B \-\-user
privilege drop.
.TP
.BI \-\-put " LOCAL:REMOTE"
Upload local file
.I LOCAL
to path
.I REMOTE
on the server, then exit. The spec is split on the first colon. Transfers run
over the resilient session and are mutually exclusive with an interactive shell
and with
.BR \-L / \-R .
.TP
.BI \-\-get " REMOTE:LOCAL"
Download server file
.I REMOTE
to local path
.IR LOCAL ,
then exit. The spec is split on the first colon. Transfers run over the
resilient session and are mutually exclusive with an interactive shell and with
.BR \-L / \-R .
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-forward\-agent
Forward your local authentication agent to the interactive session. The server
exposes an
.I SSH_AUTH_SOCK
in the shell's environment whose connections tunnel back to your local agent, so
remote
.BR git / ssh
can use your local keys without copying them to the server. Requires
.I SSH_AUTH_SOCK
to be set locally; if it is unset, noissh warns and continues without agent
forwarding.
.TP
.B \-\-copy\-id
Install this client's public key into the remote
.I authorized_keys
over SSH (the direct\-mode equivalent of
.BR ssh\-copy\-id (1)),
then exit. The key is appended to
.I ~/.config/noissh/authorized_keys
on the server (created 0600, its directory 0700) only if not already present.
After this, a direct connection from this key is authorized.
.TP
.BI \-\-forget\-host " HOST"
Remove the pinned server key(s) for
.I HOST
from
.IR ~/.config/noissh/known_hosts ,
then exit. Every label for the host (any port) is removed. Use this to recover
from an intentional server re\-key (the equivalent of
.B ssh\-keygen \-R
for noissh).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Narrate the connection sequence (direct probe, host resolution, handshake, SSH
bootstrap) to standard error. Useful for diagnosing a connect that hangs,
usually because the server's UDP port is blocked by a firewall or NAT.
.TP
.BI \-\- " ssh args"
With
.BR \-\-ssh ,
pass all remaining arguments verbatim to
.BR ssh (1).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH STATUS AND DETACHING
While an interactive session's link is healthy you see a normal shell. If it
goes quiet (roaming, a network change, or a dead spot), a status banner appears
on the top row \(em
.RI \[lq] "[noissh] last contact N s ago \(em reconnecting... (Ctrl-^ . to quit)" \[rq]
\(em and clears the moment contact resumes. It only appears after the link has
been silent longer than the keepalive interval, so a healthy idle session never
shows it.
.PP
.B Ctrl-^
(Control\-Shift\-6) is a local escape prefix:
.B Ctrl-^
then
.B .
(or
.BR q )
disconnects and exits cleanly;
.B Ctrl-^
then
.B Ctrl-^
sends one literal
.B Ctrl-^
to the remote shell.
.SH HOST ALIASES
noissh honours the relevant keys of your
.IR ~/.ssh/config :
a
.B Host
alias's
.BR HostName ,
.BR User ,
and
.B Port
are applied to both the SSH bootstrap (by
.BR ssh (1)
itself, so
.BR ProxyJump ,
.BR IdentityFile ,
etc. also apply) and the resilient Noise/UDP session, for which noissh resolves
the alias's
.B HostName
as the UDP destination.
.SH NOTES
noissh renders a live picture of the remote screen, so your terminal's native
scrollback does not capture lines that scroll off the top (as with
.BR mosh (1)).
Run
.BR tmux (1)
or
.BR screen (1)
on the server for scrollback. The client is Unix\-only.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
On first contact the server's static public key is pinned (trust on first use)
in
.IR ~/.config/noissh/known_hosts ;
a later key change aborts the connection. The client's own static key lives in
.IR ~/.config/noissh/id
and must appear in the server's
.I authorized_keys
for direct connections.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/noissh/id
Client static X25519 keypair (mode 0600).
.TP
.I ~/.config/noissh/known_hosts
Pinned server public keys.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Exits with the remote shell's exit status, or non\-zero on connection failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Connect via SSH bootstrap:
.B noissh --ssh user@server
.TP
Direct connection on a custom port:
.B noissh --port 51820 user@server
.TP
Upload a file (options precede the host):
.B noissh --put ./report.pdf:/home/user/report.pdf user@server
.TP
Download a file:
.B noissh --get /var/log/app.log:./app.log user@server
.TP
Dynamic SOCKS proxy on a local port:
.B noissh --ssh -D 1080 user@server
.TP
Run a single remote command (the command follows the host):
.B noissh --ssh user@server uname -a
.TP
Interactive shell with agent forwarding:
.B noissh --ssh -A user@server
.TP
Authorize this key on a server for direct connections:
.B noissh --copy-id user@server
.TP
Recover after an intentional server re-key:
.B noissh --forget-host server
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR noisshd (1),
.BR ssh (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Gerardo Di Giacomo.
